What is the committee looking for?: a person with potential for doing valuable
research. 

What does it take to be a successful researcher?

 - you have to be autonomous. You have to have an understanding for why you
   are doing things. 

You don't have to be out to save starving children in Africa in order to have
societal impact. Really, you just need to have a deep intellectual
understanding of how your work fits into the broader picture. You have to
undestand /why/ you do things. You have the ability to identify
compelling problems. You have have to be able to understand why other people
do things the way they currently do. This is absolutely a prerequisite for
being able to identify status quos that need to be changed, and not

It's not how clever you are. It's how effectively you can achieve what you
think the world should be -- whether that's by leveraging your own cleverness,
or leverage the help of others.

Put yourself in the shoes of the NSF comittee:
  - I'm in a hot room, 
  - I've been spending 5 hours straight reading papers
  - I don't want to have to do a lot of work to evaluate whether this paper
    has merit
  - I've been told by the commitee exactly what to look for. I am the
    government, and I'm looking to allocate money to the nations students to
    maximize the potential societal and intellectual impact you will have.
    Think of it as ROI -- 90,000 is a lot of money! I want to make sure that
    is disseminated back to society -- it shouldn't just go to paying a kid to
    sit in his office doing diff eq. all day, proving to himself and others
    that he's clever. 


Tips on writing -- verbal abolsutely comes before written. It should tell a
story. Sit down with another person and a voice recorder. Have a socratic
dialog -- why is your working compelling? Why did you choose to do it? What
got you interested in research in the first place? How did your prior
experiences give you the realization that we should be doing things in X new way
as outlined in  your reseach proposal?

Gnitty gritty practical tips:

 - Do this with other people, absolutey!
 - Write drafts ealier and often! Get as much feedback as you can! from all
   audinces, both techincal and non-technical!k
 - Every essay should be different views of the same concept: the core is the
   research statement. The personal history convinces them that you have the
   ability to do the research. The personal statement convinces them that you
   have the personal awareness to go out and have an impact.

 - Get example essays from friends, from past winners, from the University
    offfice.  Most Universities have staff members devotyed to this. `
  
